docs/src/scalability/scalability.rst, before:

..
   Copyright (c) 2024 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
..
   SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Scalability
~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _party_scaling:

Number of Parties per Validator
-------------------------------

While the underlying Canton participant supports up to 1 million
parties per node, limitations in the validator app currently mean that
only up to 200 parties are supported when the validator app is
involved. The limit of 200 parties is expected to be lifted in the future which
should make those workarounds no longer required.


Concretely, the limit of 200 parties applies to:

1. Parties not using external signing that are onboarded through the validator
   APIs or any other party for which a ``WalletAppInstall`` contract has been created separately.
2. Parties using external signing for which the onboarding contracts
   have been set up through ``/v0/admin/external-party/setup-proposal``
   or where a ``ValidatorRight`` contract with the ``validator`` party set to the validator operator party has been created manually.

It does not apply to:

1. Parties not using external signing that have been created through
   the Ledger API or Canton admin API and have not been onboarded
   through the validator APIs or have associated ``WalletAppInstall``
   contracts.
2. Parties using external signing for which no corresponding
   ``ValidatorRight`` exists with the ``validator`` party set to the
   validator operator party. Note that
   ``/v0/admin/external-party/setup-proposal`` does set up such a
   ``ValidatorRight`` contract so this API must be avoided. Using the
   ``ExternalPartySetupProposal`` contract directly for setting
   preapprovals is possible but the ``validator`` party must be set to
   a different party than the validator operator party. This also
   implies that you need to write your own automation to renew the
   preapproval when it expires. Refer to :ref:`docs
   <preapproval_renewal>` for more details.


Bypassing the Limit
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The preferred option of bypassing the limit is to set up an external
party either directly through the `Canton APIs for external signing
<https://docs.digitalasset.com/build/3.4/explanations/external-signing/external_signing_overview.html>`_
or ``/v0/admin/external-party/topology/{generate,submit}`` on the
validator API or but *not* use the endpoints under
``/v0/admin/external-party/setup-proposal``.

If you do not need preapprovals, this is sufficient.

If you do need to create preapprovals, you must ensure that you do not
create ``ValidatorRight`` contract with the ``validator`` party set to
the validator operator. The best option for this is to use ``#splice-wallet:Splice.Wallet.TransferPreapproval:TransferPreapprovalProposal`` to gather
authorization from both the external party and the validator operator
which creates the ``TransferPreapproval`` but
does not create a ``ValidatorRight`` contract. As long as the
``provider`` on the resulting ``TransferPreapproval`` is the validator
operator party, the renewal automation for transfer preapprovals in
the validator will still continue functioning. If you set it to a
different party, you need to build your own renewal automation.

Implications of bypassing the Limit
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Note that bypassing the validator limit does mean that the validator
app does not process any contracts for that party. Most notably, this
means that there is no reward minting automation running for that
party including the fact that ``ValidatorRewardCoupon`` activity
records generated for that party cannot be minted by the validator
operator as this relies on the ``ValidatorRight`` contract. If this is
required, you must build your own minting automation.

You also cannot use any of the validator endpoints under
``/v0/admin/external-party/`` for this party, e.g., to initiate a
transfer. Instead, interact with the external party through the :ref:`token standard <token_standard>` over the ledger API.

.. _topology_batching:

Topology Batching
-----------------

By default, topology batching is disabled meaning that every single
topology transaction gets submitted as its own message to the
synchronizer. This is in particular required for bootstrapping where a
batch that is too large could exceed the free traffic limit preventing
the node from ever being able to even get to the point where it can
purchase traffic and the only option is to purchase traffic for the
new node from an existing node.

However, after bootstrapping is complete (the validator readiness
probe reports as ready and you observe rewards collected), it can be
useful to increase the batch size to increase the throughput of
topology transactions that can be submitted by your node. This is in
particular useful for nodes from wallets that host a lot of different
end user parties.

To do so, add the following :ref:`environment variables
<configuration_ad_hoc>` to your participant configuration. You can
experiment with the batch size but batch sizes above 20 are not
recommended as batches that are too large can cause issues.

.. code::

    - name: ADDITIONAL_CONFIG_TOPOLOGY_BATCH_SIZE
      value: |
        canton.participants.participant.topology.broadcast-batch-size = 20

Commit message:

Update other docs where minting delegation is clearly relevant

docs/src/scalability/scalability.rst, after:

..
   Copyright (c) 2024 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
..
   SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Scalability
~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _party_scaling:

Number of Parties per Validator
-------------------------------

While the underlying Canton participant supports up to 1 million
parties per node, limitations in the validator app currently mean that
only up to 200 parties are supported when the validator app is
involved. The limit of 200 parties is expected to be lifted in the future which
should make those workarounds no longer required.


Concretely, the limit of 200 parties applies to:

1. Parties not using external signing that are onboarded through the validator
   APIs or any other party for which a ``WalletAppInstall`` contract has been created separately.
2. Parties using external signing for which the onboarding contracts
   have been set up through ``/v0/admin/external-party/setup-proposal``
   or where a ``ValidatorRight`` contract with the ``validator`` party set to the validator operator party has been created manually.

It does not apply to:

1. Parties not using external signing that have been created through
   the Ledger API or Canton admin API and have not been onboarded
   through the validator APIs or have associated ``WalletAppInstall``
   contracts.
2. Parties using external signing for which no corresponding
   ``ValidatorRight`` exists with the ``validator`` party set to the
   validator operator party. Note that
   ``/v0/admin/external-party/setup-proposal`` does set up such a
   ``ValidatorRight`` contract so this API must be avoided. Using the
   ``ExternalPartySetupProposal`` contract directly for setting
   preapprovals is possible but the ``validator`` party must be set to
   a different party than the validator operator party. This also
   implies that you need to write your own automation to renew the
   preapproval when it expires. Refer to :ref:`docs
   <preapproval_renewal>` for more details.


Bypassing the Limit
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The preferred option of bypassing the limit is to set up an external
party either directly through the `Canton APIs for external signing
<https://docs.digitalasset.com/build/3.4/explanations/external-signing/external_signing_overview.html>`_
or ``/v0/admin/external-party/topology/{generate,submit}`` on the
validator API or but *not* use the endpoints under
``/v0/admin/external-party/setup-proposal``.

If you do not need preapprovals, this is sufficient.

If you do need to create preapprovals, you must ensure that you do not
create ``ValidatorRight`` contract with the ``validator`` party set to
the validator operator. The best option for this is to use ``#splice-wallet:Splice.Wallet.TransferPreapproval:TransferPreapprovalProposal`` to gather
authorization from both the external party and the validator operator
which creates the ``TransferPreapproval`` but
does not create a ``ValidatorRight`` contract. As long as the
``provider`` on the resulting ``TransferPreapproval`` is the validator
operator party, the renewal automation for transfer preapprovals in
the validator will still continue functioning. If you set it to a
different party, you need to build your own renewal automation.

Implications of bypassing the Limit
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Note that bypassing the validator limit does mean that the validator
app does not process any contracts for that party. Most notably, this
means that there is no reward minting automation running for that
party including the fact that ``ValidatorRewardCoupon`` activity
records generated for that party cannot be minted by the validator
operator as this relies on the ``ValidatorRight`` contract. If reward
minting is required, you have two options:

1. Use a :ref:`minting delegation <validator-delegations>` to delegate reward
   collection to a validator without counting towards the party limit.
2. Build your own minting automation.

You also cannot use any of the validator endpoints under
``/v0/admin/external-party/`` for this party, e.g., to initiate a
transfer. Instead, interact with the external party through the :ref:`token standard <token_standard>` over the ledger API.

.. _topology_batching:

Topology Batching
-----------------

By default, topology batching is disabled meaning that every single
topology transaction gets submitted as its own message to the
synchronizer. This is in particular required for bootstrapping where a
batch that is too large could exceed the free traffic limit preventing
the node from ever being able to even get to the point where it can
purchase traffic and the only option is to purchase traffic for the
new node from an existing node.

However, after bootstrapping is complete (the validator readiness
probe reports as ready and you observe rewards collected), it can be
useful to increase the batch size to increase the throughput of
topology transactions that can be submitted by your node. This is in
particular useful for nodes from wallets that host a lot of different
end user parties.

To do so, add the following :ref:`environment variables
<configuration_ad_hoc>` to your participant configuration. You can
experiment with the batch size but batch sizes above 20 are not
recommended as batches that are too large can cause issues.

.. code::

    - name: ADDITIONAL_CONFIG_TOPOLOGY_BATCH_SIZE
      value: |
        canton.participants.participant.topology.broadcast-batch-size = 20
